As the organization moves forward, what advice would you have to this department and the College of Agriculture if you were their consultant?
Oh my goodness.
Right now, both the college and the department are going through what they call a visioning process.
As you know, the A&M went through the 2020.
Well, right now, our college and our department are writing these vision statements.
And, of course, what they're trying to do is focus on those things they're good at,
and those things they ought to be good at and try to major on those two things rather than trying to be all everything.
But take your strengths and take the important issues and try to match those the best you can.
And that's the approach that we're using and it's
trying to relate to our different clients you know like our students our public service and for research to help develop new new technologies and those are the things that we're trying to focus on now we'll continue to have a try to have a strong undergraduate program strong master's program and PhD program we're going to try to have all of those now we have a
organized our department now so that we offer the agribusiness degree as well as the ag economics degree both at the undergraduate level and at the master's level so that we can fit our students into more positions
than traditional ag economics and majors because it the line between the business world and agribusiness world is very narrow and our students get tremendous training in business and economics and the application of this which gives our
I think a real advantage when it comes to the job market.
We like for them to get internships and summer experiences that will enhance their skills and abilities and help focus where they want to go.
So looking ahead,
I think we're going to try to have more of the outside of the classroom experience built into the classroom so that the students will be better prepared, as we call them, job ready, you know, when they get out there.
We won't look at it as vocational training, but just people that are prepared in lifelong learning so that they'll have the techniques and technologies
and the wherewithal and how to carry on and go to the next level, as we say.
Right, if you were the decision maker, would you have the department spend more time trying to be bigger or better?
Well, I think the latter is the best, because we're big enough, you know, in terms of we have that critical mass, have enough faculty, enough student program, enough courses, and enough
We don't have enough, of course, financial resources to do all that we want to do, but I would think we should emphasize more quality rather than just trying to be- How does the department achieve that?
How does it get more quality?
Well, you have to do it with your faculty.
and with the programs that you have.
And you have good faculty, you have to keep your good faculty.
If you don't have the faculty members you need or you need to replace them, you need to be competitive and go out and get the best.
And that's the way you do it, having good programs, having good faculty, and then recruit the good students at all three levels, you know, masters, PhD, and undergraduate, and do a good job with the students that come your way.
I think that's just the way you get it done.
I mean, you look at it just much like if you were doing it for the university.
You want to get the best minds, you want to get the best faculty, you want to get the
synergism of activities and facilities that will allow you to enhance these young people's ability or these people who come to us for educational purposes.
Now most departments that I know of at most public institutions, when a senior faculty member retires, they replace that person with a comparative beginner.
That's true.
That's true with us too.
Should this department continue to do that?
I think we more or less have to.
There are some advantages and disadvantages.
The advantage is that you get some new creative ideas and you get some new people that may be with you a long time.
Now, if you bring in somebody from outside,
in an expert area that you want to get new leadership, well, you have to go outside to do that.
But I think that it's typical.
Like you said, we tend to replace senior faculty with junior faculty and let them climb the ladder.
And we have to many times start over again in certain areas.
But if we have a critical area where we feel like we've got our policy center, we have to get a very mature person for that position.
We can't just bring in a beginning person.
And it's hard sometimes to promote up the ones you already have.
But that'll be the choice, get the most qualified individual, either internally or externally, to work with something like our policy center, see, our Ag and Food Policy Center.
Now, the official title of the chief administrator of the department
Is the department head?
That's right, department head.
And in this department, if you were the decision maker, would you have that person be bound by the majority vote of the department, or does that person have more authority than that?
Well, I think here's the way that ours works, and I think I agree with that, that the department head relies heavily upon his faculty, particularly senior faculty,
He has advisory groups that work with him, and he listens a lot to their ideas, but he is, in final analysis, is the decision maker.
He says it, yay or nay, and then he has to report to the dean.
Can the teamwork of the Experiment Station Extension Service and the teaching function of the college, can it be improved in the future?
Yes, and I would look at it two ways.
One is improving it within the colleges, like the engineering college has a similar type setup, see, and agriculture has that.
But I would like to see the university
move more toward all three of those functions, you know, public service, research, and teaching.
And we think that way, because we're a land-grant university.
But I would think that what we need to do, and we need to continue to do this, is make sure that we have a collegiate faculty, intercollegiate faculty, where that, when I was indicating to you that people have joint appointments between teaching and research, or teaching and extension,
I think those things are very healthy, and we need to continue to do that, rather than just saying, you're a teacher.
I think it's better if they've got a joint appointment, because it will cause this, I think, to be, cause more heterosis, you know, hybrid vigor.
It'll also cause...
a greater output than if you just had them over here in little parts.
You do this, you do this, and you never touch that.
Based on what you understand Vision 2020 to mean for the entire institution, how do you feel about that effort?
I think it's okay.
And I don't have any doubt that our department and our college will be right up on the front edge of that.
We will do it.
I think we can do it because we already have the recognition not only statewide, nationwide, worldwide.
A&M is well recognized for its College of Agriculture and Life Sciences.
And we just need to keep working at it and then focusing that in with the vision
that 2020 has expressed for the whole university.
Now, some of those things we won't probably contribute much to, but that's the way a university works.
You've got all these parts working together, and no one individual is complete.
We've got to work together.
And one of the goals of Vision 2020 is to be in the top 20 public institutions, I believe.
And you've already said, I think, you think agricultural economics at Texas A&M would be in the top 10.
Oh yes, and I think that many of our other programs in our college would be also.
And I wouldn't even bat an eye in saying that we are in the top 10 universities as far as College of Agriculture and Life Sciences are concerned nationwide.
And we've got some evidence to indicate that.
whether you accept the Gorman reports and things like that, but it's well documented.
Let's see, reaching back.
Did you ever as a faculty member or an administrator have any instance where some comparative outsider tried to alter one of your decisions?
Some board member, some politician, some old ag tried to?
Well, that occurs in
admissions, but as far as research or how I taught, never.
What about grades?
I don't remember any
or that they call and said the student should have a better grade or anything.
Or could you reconsider that grade Billy Bob got?
You don't remember anything like that?
No, I don't remember anything like that because of that.
Can you share an example of the admission of one or two of the admissions?
Oh, yes.
You don't need to identify the person, but if you can categorize them.
No, but when I was in, like when I told you I was in the dean's office, you'd get calls occasionally, and they would be from, say, like a board member.
I understand that you have the authority to admit this student, or readmit this student, keep him in school.
Well, he's a, I know his family, they're fine constituents of mine, and a
I would like for you to have this student stay in school.
I'd say, well, you know, sir, or whatever the case might be, it's not my opinion that this person should be here.
But, I mean, they'd come across, well, you understand I'm a board member.
I'd say, yes, but you still want the best for the young person.
And they said, yes, and I think it, and they would say,
Well, I think it would.
So I remember one case that that happened.
But the board member never called me back again because what had happened is that was a terrible decision.
That was the wrong thing.
And I think if the guy, if we'd have followed my decision, he would have gone out and worked for a while.
And when he was ready to come back, he'd have made it.
But he got so far behind, as far as I know, he never got to come back again.
after he had that one chance that the board member wanted him to have.
And that's the only situation where it got all the way to a board member who asked that to be done.
The Board of Regents, I didn't like that, but I didn't back down because I thought, I was thinking in terms of what's best for the young person.
And of course, he could have said, well, you know, who are you down there to do that, you know?
You know, you're the boss, you know.
Let's see, and I realize, too, we forgot some personalities.
Jack Williams.
Describe Jack Williams as university president.
Oh, he's one of the greatest.
I mean, he was just a natural follow-up to President Rudder, because Rudder, he, that word is good, Rudder.
He Ruddered this university through some rough times, and he,
And they helped that century report and all of that was going really good.
And then to take that the next step with Jack Williams having such good people skills.
I mean, he could just take former students and an audience and just have them, so to speak, eating out of their hands.
He was a real people's person.
And that was just a natural that he follow Earl Rudder, in my opinion.
I liked Jack Williams.
Now, Jack Williams, one day, I was in the dean's office, and he was trying to get the director of the experiment station, and he tried to get the director of extension service, and he tried to get the dean of the college, and he didn't get any of them.
He was on the phone himself.
And finally, I answered the phone.
He said, well, Curtis, are you the only one there?
And I said, well, right now, that's right.
He said, well, why don't we make a decision that is so, so...
important that we'll that the other administrators will never forget this day and he said and don't be afraid to do it says uh because I'll stand behind you and I told him well I'm still afraid to do that but that was that was his way of working with people he says you know I'm the boss and just whatever you want to do just make some decision so these other administrators will never forget this day
But that was funny, I liked the way he dealt with people.
What about any of the other key campus leaders since the mid-70s?
Any that stand out in your mind?
Well, of course, as far as students are concerned, John Coles is probably the greatest guy that ever come along here at A&M to work with students.
He's really great.
And as far as...
People in the university, I don't know of any single individual that stands out in my mind.
As I look across the campus of the people, there's not any individual coming to my mind right now that says, okay, they made a rudder difference.
I don't know anybody like that.
I'm sorry.
Right.
Then as you look in the year 2000, as you look
to A&M's future, how would you describe your feeling about A&M's prospects in future years?
I think they look good.
I think they look good because A&M is still maturing as a university, a community of colleges pursuing the excellence in education and
intellectual development.
I think we're still moving up.
I think we're still moving up, and I think we'll, it looks good.
I think it'll be good.
I really do.
All right, then we're getting close to the end.
What are the keys to Aggie spirit?
What creates Aggie spirit?
I just think it's that in the early part of the college career, and this doesn't happen before they get here, it happens like at fish camp and in the core units in that togetherness where they share dreams and aspirations and they rely on each other and they motivate each other.
I think when they become acquainted and shared values, they become like family.
And that goes beyond the campus.
And I don't think that it can occur to a person unless they've been there and experienced that.
Just like the comment was made about Bonfire.
It says that those people inside can't explain it.
Those people outside can't understand it.
It's just like a spirit.
And that describes it.
It happens because you have common experiences together.
You share things together.
You've got the 12-man concept where you're slow to criticize your fellow classmate.
You're willing to stand in their place when they cannot stand.
You're willing to share a burden with them.
You're willing to share an important project with them.
and that attitude of willing to help each other without expecting payment in return.
I think it would be a four letter word like they love each other.
As you see the student body today, do you see any divisions between urban and rural or major or sex or race or are they pretty well pulling together?
Well, of all the time I've been here, it appears that there's been a movement toward more of a cohesiveness, it looks to me like, because now you don't have corps, civilian, you don't have women versus men.
or, you know, one culture against another, there is still a long way to go.
I mean, we still are trying to move toward a better situation.
But I don't feel like it's any confrontational things now.
I think it could be better, and it's moving that way.
You see a lot of issues that come up where the students get involved.
Sometimes they ought to, and sometimes they shouldn't.
I think it's healthy.
All right.
As we near conclusion, what has it meant to you that you have spent a third of a century here at Texas A&M?
What impact has that had on you?
Well, I would look at it this way.
My objective was when I went into the area of education, higher education,
to help young people better their lives, that A&M has helped me do that.
And I've had the opportunity to do that with hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of people, thousands and thousands of people.
There's not a day it passes, and certainly not a week, where I don't get affirmation that I made a difference.
And that was my goal, to make a difference.
And so as I look at it now, and I hear many of these sons and daughters now of former students are coming back, and I still have that same impact on them and can have continuous impact.
And someone will say, now, I want you to stay there until my son gets there and my daughter gets there.
And I say, well, I might be for that oldest one or whatever.
But to me, to realize that you can make a difference and you've got to be consistent, it has been a delight to be an adopted Aggie, you know, because it's like they say about A&M, you can't explain it.
You can't explain it.
And if you're outside of it, you can't understand it.
But now I'm in the inside of it, I can understand what's happening, but I can't explain it to others.
Last question.
What feelings do you hold in your heart for A&M?
I think it's a great place.
And I would defend it and I will support it and encourage it as long as I can because I think the ideal for which A&M has stood for these years and as it progresses to move to the higher level of human interaction and human achievement,
I just feel like it's on the right path.
It may be still on a journey, and we haven't arrived, but it's headed in the right direction.
I think it is.